cluster logging log forwarding proposal (#16)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/cluster-logging/cluster-logging-log-forwarding.md

---
title: cluster-logging-log-forwarding
authors:
  - "@jcantrill"
reviewers:
  - "@bparees"
  - "@ewolinetz"
  - "@jeremyeder"
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2019-09-17
last-updated: 2019-09-17
status: implementable
see-also:[]
replaces:[]
superseded-by:[]
---

# cluster-logging-log-forwarding

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift/docs]

## Summary

The purpose of log forwarding is to provide a declarative way by which adopters of cluster logging can ship

> container and node logs to destinations that are not necessarily managed by the OKD cluster logging infrastructure. This is on-cluster endpoints like the Elasticsearch cluster deployed by cluster logging, an organization's Kafka message bus, or off-cluster to existing log aggregation solutions (e.g. Splunk, Graylog).  Additionally, log forwarding enables administrators to deploy only the components needed to ship the logs without needing to deploy the entire cluster logging stack.

Reviewer: This reads sort of clunky.. maybe something like:
Destinations would include either on or off cluster end points such as the Cluster Logging provided Elasticsearch, an organization's Kafka message bus, or other log aggregation solutions (e.g. Splunk, Graylog).

> container and node logs to destinations that are not necessarily managed by the OKD cluster logging infrastructure. This is on-cluster endpoints like the Elasticsearch cluster deployed by cluster logging, an organization's Kafka message bus, or off-cluster to existing log aggregation solutions (e.g. Splunk, Graylog).  Additionally, log forwarding enables administrators to deploy only the components needed to ship the logs without needing to deploy the entire cluster logging stack.

Reviewer: Nit, but can't we already deploy just components to ship logs today? We don't need to deploy the entire stack today...

Author: We can but I think its not as obvious: deploy fluent, make unmanaged, edit config.  I'll remove it

Reviewer: This may actually be a current functionality gap, but we don't watch the contents of fluentd -- so the operator doesn't need to go unmanaged.

Author: It's a gap IMO.  Part of the initial PR I will be submitting hashes the config, adds it to fluent so that the config is reverted should someone manually change it.  The deployment of fluent should be consistent from the operators perspective.

### Goals
The specific goals of this proposal are:

* Provide an API that identifies log sources and their desired destination
* Send logs to an Elasticsearch cluster not managed by the cluster logging infrastructure
* Send logs to a fluentd instance not managed by the cluster logging infrastructure via fluentd's secureforward protocol
* Allow deployment of log forwarding without deploying the entirety of the cluster logging infrastructure (e.g. Kibana, Elasticsearch)
* Support TLS between the collector and destination if so configured
* Specifically only forward "application" and "infrastructure" logs
* Re-use log forwarding to write logs to a cluster logging managed log aggregator (e.g. Elasticsearch)

We will be successful when:

* an administrator is able to deploy their own log aggregation service
* specifies this service in log forwarding configuration
* the service receives logs from a OKD cluster logging deployed collection agent  

### Non-Goals

> Log forward intends to be opinionated about the source of log messages; it will explicitly define what constitutes "application logs" or "infrastructure logs". It will not allow configuration of additional sources without further design considerations and how those sources may impact the collecting agent. Log forwarding is not intended to provide a complex routing solution as one might achieve by using a custom collector configuration or a messaging solution (e.g. kafka).

Reviewer: more an implementation detail, but couldn't we accomplish this if we have a comma delimited list and some constants as `source` choices? 

Something like:
```
- source: APPS, INFRA
  destination: abc
- source: APPS, !noisy-namespace
  destination: xyz
- source: INFRA_NODE, INFRA_CONTAINER
  destination: jkl
```

Reviewer 2: opinionated is ok for the first pass, but i think we should be heading towards a config api that allows the admin to specify specific namespaces or even pods (by label for example) that should be collected and where they should be sent.

And this ties back to my earlier question about whether forwarding to the "managed" elastic storage will be configured via this same mechanism, or it will have unique/hardcoded behavior.

Reviewer 3: Part of being opinionated here is that we will not support _every_ configuration option provided by the plugin.  For example https://docs.fluentd.org/output/forward has many parameters - I don't think we want to expose all of them in the CR - for another example, you can specify some of them multiple times - fluentd will load balance/round robin among a list of hosts you specify, each with their own possibly different port,username,password,shared_key, tls cert/key/settings, etc.

If we go down that road, we might as well let the user provide us with the actual fluentd plugin config in that format, as a configmap, and one or more secrets, then the user would provide the configmap and secret name(s) in the clusterlogging CR.

Author: > more an implementation detail, but couldn't we accomplish this if we have a comma delimited list and some constants as `source` choices?
> 
> Something like:
> 
> ```
> - source: APPS, INFRA
>   destination: abc
> - source: APPS, !noisy-namespace
>   destination: xyz
> - source: INFRA_NODE, INFRA_CONTAINER
>   destination: jkl
> ```

We could but this is really just a variant of what is proposed: its `[]sources->dest` instead of `source->[]dest`.  I prefer sources being an explicit API choice that define a very specific thing we are collecting instead of a more wide open list.  I think it is likely easier to implement as is now because of how we generate the config; there is no need to figure how to merge sources

Author: > opinionated is ok for the first pass, but i think we should be heading towards a config api that allows the admin to specify specific namespaces or even pods (by label for example) that should be collected and where they should be sent.
> 
I think we could accomplish this in future by adding sub-elements to the sources which may define: throttling, exclusions.  Maybe because sources are able to very we should consider defining the sources with a 'type' so they can also be independently configured.

> And this ties back to my earlier question about whether forwarding to the "managed" elastic storage will be configured via this same mechanism, or it will have unique/hardcoded behavior.

Yes. Introduce logic to normalize the `clusterlogging` resource and treat the managed instance as any other.  The initial PR does exactly this.

Reviewer: > We could but this is really just a variant of what is proposed: its `[]sources->dest` instead of `source->[]dest`. I prefer sources being an explicit API choice that define a very specific thing we are collecting instead of a more wide open list. I think it is likely easier to implement as is now because of how we generate the config; there is no need to figure how to merge sources

I meant more that we could have constants for different sources, similar to what you had proposed as well - I think you had `logs.app` and `logs.infra` but I'm also proposing that we can append a `!noisy-namespace` to remove it from `logs.app` or something. This way we could cover the config api that Ben referred to above.

Author: An alternate API that we might only partially implement in this pass:
```
apiVersion: "logging.openshift.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "ClusterLogging"
spec:
  collection:
    type: fluentd
    forwarding:
      targets:
       - type: “elasticsearch”
         name: elasticsearch
         endpoint: https://elasticsearch.svc.messaging.cluster.local:9200
         certificates:
            secretName: elasticsearch
       - type: “secureforward”
         name: secureforward-offcluster
         endpoint: secureforward.offcluster.com:8586
         certificates:
            secretName: secureforward
      sources:
        logs.app:
          excluded:
          - myproject
          - yourproject
          targets:
          - elasticsearch
          - secureforward-offcluster
        logs.infra:
          throttle:
          - namespace: openshift-registry
            value:  50
          targets:
          - elasticsearch
```

Following is the list of supported endpoint types for this proposal:

* Elasticsearch
* Fluent secure-forward

### User Stories

#### As an OKD admin, I want to collect logs and send them to my own aggregation solution, for example Splunk

This is a typical example of organizations that desires to re-use their existing enterprise log solution.  We will succeeded if we are able to write logs to their logging service.

#### As an OKD admin, I want to aggregate application logs on-cluster and infra logs off-cluster

This is an example of an OKD cluster hosting solution where several organizations are each provided with a dedicated cluster.  The organization requires access to application container logs but the host requires access to the infra structure logs.

### Implementation Details

#### Assumptions

* A pipeline shall support at least one target endpoint. 
* A pipeline may support multiple target endpoints.
* Endpoints that require secrets which are not created by the cluster-logging-operator shall be created and managed by the administrator of the endpoint

> * Secrets shall have keys of: cert,key,cacert which point to the respective certificates for which they represent

Reviewer: should we actually try to match more closely what is done for a `tls` type secret? They use `tls.crt` and `tls.key`.. we could also add `ca.crt` then

Reviewer 3: So, for example, the steps for configuring secure_forward would be:
* user creates `secret/my-secure-forward-secret` which contains the "secret" parameters (that is, the parameters whose values we don't want in cleartext in the clusterlogging CR) used to configure https://docs.fluentd.org/output/forward:
```yaml
password: ASJDWEASJDFasd==
shared_key: KV203lnJSDFlasdf==
tls_cert_path: ASDJFASDFASDF==
tls_client_cert_path: XCKFWE2308945==
tls_client_private_key_path: ZXMCVOOEPWEP99==
etc.
```
well, the `path` parameters would be the actual contents of the cert/key files - the secret would mount these files into the pod, then we would generate fluentd config like
```
    tls_cert_path /etc/fluent/my-secure-forward-secret/tls_cert_path
```

Author: > should we actually try to match more closely what is done for a `tls` type secret? They use `tls.crt` and `tls.key`.. we could also add `ca.crt` then

This choice was made based on available options to `curl` but I'm open to values that are more consistent to what you may find elsewhere.  Should it be `tls.cacrt`  or `tls.ca.crt` or just `ca.crt`

Reviewer 3: ok - I think using the `curl` names is fine - and for parameters for which there is no curl name e.g. `shared_key` we should use the name from the `fluentd` configuration.

Reviewer: I think `ca.crt` makes the most sense since it would have been used to sign `tls.crt` and may not be exclusive to the cert provided in the secret

Author: Doesn't seem we have consensus here? More Opinions?

Reviewer 4: The only thing I would request here is to be able to configure the TLS protocol version and the cipher suite. These options are very often requested by customers that need to meet regulations or compliance requirements.

Author: @JAORMX these items don't necessarily need to be in the secret which hides certs do they?  Seems the target endpoint config is a better place to optionally allow these items

Reviewer 3: They do not need to be in the secret.  The only things that need to be in the secret are things which are either very large (like a cert) or things that we don't want in cleartext in the CR (like a key, password, etc.).

I think we may want to expose most of the TLS parameters in the CR - tls_version, tls_ciphers, etc.  I also notice there are Windows specific ones we may need to add for Windows support.  https://docs.fluentd.org/output/forward#tls_version

Note that the elasticsearch output plugin does not support specifying the cipher suites: https://github.com/uken/fluent-plugin-elasticsearch/blob/master/lib/fluent/plugin/out_elasticsearch.rb#L91 - there are very few tls parameters

#### Security
* A pipeline may support TLS configuration by declaring a secret. Secrets must contain keys: cert, key, cacert
* Endpoints defined without a secret will use unsecure communication

#### Cluster Logging With Logstore, Collector, and LogForwarding

> * Undeclared source messages are routed to logstore

Reviewer: Is there really much of a difference (implementation-wise) between this scenario and the following?
Could we just default that no declared pipeline means we default all source to the on cluster log store, otherwise if a pipeline is defined then to send logs to the created logstore users would need to be explicit as well and specify a constant that the operator would know means to route to the logstore?

Reviewer 2: what is an "undeclared source message"?  what is "logstore"?

Reviewer 3: I think this means that if you have deployed the full OpenShift logging stack with the Logstore (i.e. Elasticsearch), and you have specified a source and target for `logs.app`, but did not specify anything for `logs.infra`, then logs from `logs.infra` will automatically be stored in the OpenShift logging stack Logstore with no further configuration required.

Reviewer 2: ok. as long as we have good docs :)

"defaults to internal logstore if you have one, vanishes to devnull otherwise"

* Declared source messages are routed to the defined service
#### Cluster Logging With Pipelines Only
* Undeclared source messages are ignored
* Declared source messages are routed to the defined service

### Risks and Mitigations

## Design Details

The `cluster-logging-operator` will use the forwarding API to generate a collector configuration and mount any secrets into the collector pod.

### API Specification
The proposed forwarding API:

```
apiVersion: "logging.openshift.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "ClusterLogging"
spec:

>   forwarding:

Reviewer: would it make more sense to nest this under the collector since that is where it is most relevant? If a collector isn't defined then this would be moot. (same level as the collector `type`)

Reviewer 2: the feature is "pipeline" so shouldn't "forwarding" instead be "pipeline"  (this struct is defining the pipeline, right?)

Author: > the feature is "pipeline" so shouldn't "forwarding" instead be "pipeline" (this struct is defining the pipeline, right?)

I changed it to 'forwarding' because @christianvogt is using that term.

Author: > would it make more sense to nest this under the collector since that is where it is most relevant? If a collector isn't defined then this would be moot. (same level as the collector `type`)

I will move it.  The collector is required and I believe we agreed elsewhere that we desired for admins to be explicit

Author: Reverted so 'forwarding' is a sibling to collector.  Discussion @sichvoge advised that 'forwarding' may not necessarily be tied to 'collection' in the future

- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift/docs]

## Summary

The purpose of log forwarding is to provide a declarative way by which adopters of cluster logging can ship
container and node logs to destinations that are not necessarily managed by the OKD cluster logging infrastructure.
Destinations are either on or off cluster endpoints such as the cluster logging provided Elasticsearch, an organization's Kafka message bus, or other log aggregation solutions (e.g. Splunk, Graylog).

## Motivation

Organizations desire to reuse their existing enterprise log solutions to store container logs.  Providing a declarative mechanism by which administrators define a log destination simplifies their operational burden.  The cluster logging stack is able to deploy a collector to each OKD node that is configured with the necessary permissions to collect the logs, add container metadata (e.g. labels) and ship them to the specified endpoint.

### Goals
The specific goals of this proposal are:

* Provide an API that identifies log sources and their desired destination
* Send logs to an Elasticsearch cluster not managed by the cluster logging infrastructure

> * Send logs to a fluentd instance not managed by the cluster logging infrastructure via fluentd's secureforward protocol

Reviewer 2: any other targets that should/must be supported?

Author: > any other targets that should/must be supported?

I explicitly only chose to mention the ones we discussed supporting in 4.3.  Do we need to mention others at this time?

Author: I explicitly chose not to mention them here as we are not putting them into 4.3.  Should we mention what may be included in the future?

Reviewer 2: nope..just wanted to make sure what you listed was (currently) exhaustive.

* Allow deployment of log forwarding without deploying the entirety of the cluster logging infrastructure (e.g. Kibana, Elasticsearch)
* Support TLS between the collector and destination if so configured

> * Specifically only forward "application" and "infrastructure" logs

Reviewer 3: Does this mean "send 'application' logs to a different target than 'infrastructure' logs"?  Not sure if that is clear enough - perhaps "send 'application' logs to a different target than the target used for 'infrastructure' logs"?

Author: I'm trying to express we are only shipping container and node logs, not events, not audit. not <insert log type here>

Reviewer 3: I thought that was already called out above in the "non-goals" or "not supported in this release" section.

> * Re-use log forwarding to write logs to a cluster logging managed log aggregator (e.g. Elasticsearch)

Reviewer 2: will forwarding to the "managed" elastic cluster be configured the same way as any other target?  or is it treated" specially" by the forwarding configuration/logic?

Author: Treated the same

Reviewer 2: probably worth stating this general premise explicitly.

also what does that mean for how the user provided config bits(ones forwarding logs elsewhere) interact with what i assume will be operator generated config bits (the ones wiring up our internal collection/logstore)?  How do we keep them from changing our settings or what do we do if they do?

Author: > also what does that mean for how the user provided config bits(ones forwarding logs elsewhere) interact with what i assume will be operator generated config bits (the ones wiring up our internal collection/logstore)? How do we keep them from changing our settings or what do we do if they do?

When writing to CLO managed store, there are no config bits or concerns that are relevant to users because the cert gen and regen are managed by CLO.  We state that users need to create a secret with the appropriate certs that we consume in order to write to a service provided by users.  It is a user's responsibility to change those certs when needed.  Is this different then any other user managed service?  Are there examples of other cluster services that take ownership of secrets they did not create?

Reviewer 2: if there are no config bits for the internal store then i guess that is fine.

## Proposal

Log forwarding will provide a declarative way to specify the destination for specific types of logs using a 'pipeline'.  A 'pipeline' defines simple routing for one source to one or more destinations. The source of logs are opinionated and well defined by cluster logging. The initial source types are as follows:

* `logs.app` - Container logs generated by user applications running on the platform, excluding infrastructure container applications
* `logs.infra` - Logs generated by both infrastructure components running on the platform and OKD nodes (e.g. journal logs).  "Infra" applications are defined as any pods which run in namespaces: `openshift*`, `kube*`, `default`.

Future types may be:
* `events.kubernetes` - Kubernetes events
* `audit.container-engine` - Container engine audit events

> There are no assumptions regarding whether or not an endpoint is deployed on or off cluster.  Endpoints off-cluster may require adminstrators to perform additional actions in order for logs to be forwarded (e.g. secret creation, opening port) 

Reviewer 2: may also require proxy configuration, CA injection.

Reviewer 3: So, for example, the steps for configuring secure_forward would be:
* user creates `secret/my-secure-forward-secret` which contains the "secret" parameters (that is, the parameters whose values we don't want in cleartext in the clusterlogging CR) used to configure https://docs.fluentd.org/output/forward:
```yaml
password: ASJDWEASJDFasd==
shared_key: KV203lnJSDFlasdf==
tls_cert_path: ASDJFASDFASDF==
tls_client_cert_path: XCKFWE2308945==
tls_client_private_key_path: ZXMCVOOEPWEP99==
etc.
```
well, the `path` parameters would be the actual contents of the cert/key files - the secret would mount these files into the pod, then we would generate fluentd config like
```
    tls_cert_path /etc/fluent/my-secure-forward-secret/tls_cert_path
```

Author: > may also require proxy configuration, CA injection.

Are admins doing anything special in this situation? Would they not create the global proxy object and then operator would consume it without any specific config by an admin for forwarding?

Reviewer 2: they might need to configure their proxy to allow access to the external logstore, or list it in a noproxy setting.

Or if for some reason this is the first/only thing that needs to go through the proxy, then they'd have to setup the cluster proxy config from scratch for this.

i'd put it in the same category as "opening a port"

Also your operator would need to wire the proxyconfig+CAs to fluentd(or to whatever thing needs to forward the logs externally), if it is not already.

Reviewer: We would need to make sure our operator looks for the `proxy` config object and if it exists leverage the `httpProxy`, `httpsProxy`, `noProxy`, and `additionalTrustBundle` information.

Author: @bparees please advise how to reflect your comment in this proposal

Reviewer 2: 1) add proxy configuration to the list of things they may need to do, in addition to opening ports

2) basically what @ewolinetz said.  we need to ensure that when we configure our fluentd, we are providing it with the cluster proxy configuration/CAs so it can use them when forwarding logs off cluster.  I think you guys already took a pass at doing that in 4.2 though it may not be complete?

Author: modified to add `enable global proxy configuration`

Following is the list of supported endpoint types for this proposal:

* Elasticsearch
* Fluent secure-forward

### User Stories

#### As an OKD admin, I want to collect logs and send them to my own aggregation solution, for example Splunk

> This is a typical example of organizations that desires to re-use their existing enterprise log solution.  We will succeeded if we are able to write logs to their logging service.

Reviewer 2: Splunk isn't listed above as a supported endpoint, so how will this be enabled?  via secure-forward to a secondary fluentd(installed/managed by the admin) that the customer then configures to send to splunk?

Reviewer 3: Right - maybe this should be the user story for deploying only the collector with no Elasticsearch/Kibana - "As an OKD admin, I want to deploy only the OKD log collector, and have it ship logs off cluster to my own aggregation solution."

#### As an OKD admin, I want to aggregate application logs on-cluster and infra logs off-cluster

This is an example of an OKD cluster hosting solution where several organizations are each provided with a dedicated cluster.  The organization requires access to application container logs but the host requires access to the infra structure logs.

### Implementation Details

#### Assumptions

* A pipeline shall support at least one target endpoint. 
* A pipeline may support multiple target endpoints.
* Endpoints that require secrets which are not created by the cluster-logging-operator shall be created and managed by the administrator of the endpoint
* Secrets shall have keys of: cert,key,cacert which point to the respective certificates for which they represent

#### Security
* A pipeline may support TLS configuration by declaring a secret. Secrets must contain keys: cert, key, cacert

> * Endpoints defined without a secret will use unsecure communication

Reviewer 4: It would be nice if here we wouldn't do "insecure by default"; meaning, if folks do need to use an insecure connection, then they should need to specify a flag such as: "insecure: true" or something along these lines. This makes it easier to catch such entries when doing a security audit or when attempting to harden the deployment.

Author: added to the api spec

* Endpoints defined without a secret will use unsecure communication

#### Cluster Logging With Logstore, Collector, and LogForwarding
* Undeclared source messages are routed to logstore
* Declared source messages are routed to the defined service
#### Cluster Logging With Pipelines Only

> * Undeclared source messages are ignored

Reviewer 3: If you have specified a source and target for `logs.app`, but did not specify anything for `logs.infra`, then either `logs.infra` logs will not be collected at all, or they will be discarded.

* Declared source messages are routed to the defined service

### Risks and Mitigations

## Design Details

The `cluster-logging-operator` will use the forwarding API to generate a collector configuration and mount any secrets into the collector pod.

### API Specification
The proposed forwarding API:

```
apiVersion: "logging.openshift.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "ClusterLogging"
spec:
  forwarding:
    targets:
     - type: “elasticsearch”
       name: elasticsearch
       endpoint: elasticsearch.svc.messaging.cluster.local

>        certificates:

Reviewer 3: I think this should just be `secretName: name-of-secret` since the secret may contain passwords, shared_keys, and other secure data, other than certs/keys.

Author: > I think this should just be `secretName: name-of-secret` since the secret may contain passwords, shared_keys, and other secure data, other than certs/keys.

Per your previous comment, we should restrict the API and limit the config options as much as possible.  The API should be as consistent as possible from one target to the next to facilitate admins modifying the configuration.  Is there a reason we can not be opinionated about some configuration; this is what I chose for the shared key [1].  We are going to have similar issues if we support Kafka.  Can we not be opinionated about the topic to which we write as well?  This seems reasonable as long as we properly document it.  I would prefer to stay away from providing more knobs 

[1] https://github.com/openshift/cluster-logging-operator/pull/231/files#diff-866472c112b52bddfdf28f4ce5ea2413R48

Reviewer 3: All I mean is that it is not obvious/intuitive that I'm supposed to add the `shared_key` value to something under `certificates

Reviewer 3: That is - if there is a field called `certificates` I would expect to put only certificates/keys there.  I would not expect to put the secure_forward `shared_key` field there.  That's why I suggested we get rid of `certificates` and just have a field called `secretName`, where the secret may contain certs, keys, shared_key, passwords, tokens, etc. - basically, anything that we do not want to put as cleartext in the CR.

Author: > That is - if there is a field called `certificates` I would expect to put only certificates/keys there. I would not expect to put the secure_forward `shared_key` field there. That's why I suggested we get rid of `certificates` and just have a field called `secretName`, where the secret may contain certs, keys, shared_key, passwords, tokens, etc. - basically, anything that we do not want to put as cleartext in the CR.

Modifying to be `secret` or variant does provide us more freedom to change whats included in the secret in future with a clear understanding that: if key named x exists, the config will look like 'y'.  I would encourage us to remain opinionated about NOT allowing these other types of config into this block and default these to some documented value.

            secretName: elasticsearch
     - type: “secureforward”
       name: secureforward-offcluster

>        endpoint: https://secureforward.offcluster.com:9200

Reviewer 3: I think this is the example for the elasticsearch type above

Reviewer 3: What I mean is that this is an example of a secureforward configuration - the secureforward endpoint will be just a hostname (and an optional port if not using the default) - and in the elasticsearch example, you should have an https endpoint with port 9200

       certificates:
            secretName: secureforward

>     sources:

Reviewer 2: or perhaps this should be called "pipelines"?

(where a pipeline consists of a source, and one or more targets.  or better, one or more sources and one or more targets)

Reviewer: i think for a pipeline there are sources and targets ( * -> * ) where the source is the collector source (app logs, infra node logs, infra container logs, remote sources, etc) and the target is where we ship them to by specifying the target on the source definition.

   `/var/run/ocp-collector/secrets/<secretName>/{cert,key,cacert}`

    where:

    * `secretName` is the name of a secret in the `openshift-logging` namespace.
    * `cert`, `key`, `cacert` are files in the secret
#### Collector
* Collectors will be modified to be remove endpoint config specific logic from the start script ; configuration is assumed to be correct and used as provided by the cluster-logging-operator
* Extract all configuration from after the source config point to final destination into the collector configuration.

### Test Plan
#### Unit testing
* Log forwarding will add unit tests to provide adequate coverage for all changes
* BDD unit testing will be added to unit testing to make tests goals more explicit,  readable, and obvious
#### Integration and E2E tests
* Test no regressions after upgrade when log forwarding exists
* Tests to verify there are no regressions in functionality between pre and post logforwarding
* Tests to verify log forwarding is writing logs to an Elasticsearch instance not managed by cluster logging
* Tests to verify log forwarding is writing logs to an Elasticsearch instance managed by cluster logging

> * Tests to verify log forwarding is writing logs to a Fluentd instance via secure forward that is not managed by cluster logging

Reviewer 3: We already have tests for most of these in oal - we might have to resurrect the es-copy test for the test of the Elasticsearch instance not managed by cluster logging

Reviewer 3: Do we need to call out specific versions of Elasticsearch we support?  Or do we just want to say "we provide the latest Fluentd Elasticsearch plugin and the latest Ruby Elasticsearch libraries, which should work on all recent versions of Elasticsearch, but we cannot guarantee that they will work with every version of Elasticsearch"?

Author: > Do we need to call out specific versions of Elasticsearch we support? Or do we just want to say "we provide the latest Fluentd Elasticsearch plugin and the latest Ruby Elasticsearch libraries, which should work on all recent versions of Elasticsearch, but we cannot guarantee that they will work with every version of Elasticsearch"?

Not certain that needs to be in this document but we should document the versions against which we have tested and leave it at that.

Author: @richm @ewolinetz suggestions on replacing 'certficates' to something else?  `config`?  I believe keeping some root makes sense with `secretName` as the child.  These would allow us to enhance it in future as needed

Reviewer 3: replace `certificates` with `secrets` - the value of `secrets` is the name of a secret.  The secret keys are the keys like `tls.cacert`, `tls.cert`, `tls.key`, `shared_key` - the very short list of keys

Reviewer: in the global proxy config object it uses:
```
spec:
  . . .
  trustedCA:
    name: user-ca-bundle
```

Author: @ewolinetz so `trustedCA, cert, key`?  or `trustedCA, tls.cert, tls.key`

Reviewer: @jcantrill that snippet is from the spec of the proxy config object. which was a response to https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/16#discussion_r326731068.

For the contents of the secret, I think `tls.crt (note: lack of "e" to match the "tls" secret type names)` `tls.key` for sure. and maybe something like `additionalTrustBundle".

@bparees what is the field name used in `secret/user-ca-bundle`?

Reviewer 2: not sure what `secret/user-ca-bundle` is?

closest thin
g i can think of that you are referring to is the `configmap/trusted-ca-bundle` which uses `ca-bundle.crt` as the key.

or `configmap/service-ca` which also uses `ca-bundle.crt`.

and then there's the configmaps you create and annotate with `service.beta.openshift.io/inject-cabundle: true` which get a key named `service-ca.crt` injected....

Reviewer 2: oh and there's the secrets you ask for/get for server signing certs..... that secret will contain a `tls.crt` and `tls.key` key.

Reviewer: @jcantrill i'd suggest `ca-bundle.crt`, `tls.crt`, and `tls.key` then as field names

### Graduation Criteria

##### Tech Preview

* Ability to store logs to the cluster managed log aggregator without defining log forwarding (e.g. status quo)

> * Explicitly define and document log sources and their meanings (e.g. `logs.apps`, `logs.infa`)

Reviewer 3: infra

* Explicitly define supported targets (e.g. `elasticsearch`, `fluentd`)

> - Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end

Reviewer 3: not sure what this means

- End user documentation, relative API stability
- Sufficient test coverage
- Gather feedback from users rather than just developers

##### Tech Preview -> GA 

- More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- Concrete API
- Additional supported targets (e.g. `Splunk`, `Graylog`, `kafka`)

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> * Upgrades should be seemless to users of cluster logging deployments managed by the cluster-logging-operator.  The current implementation is a static file mounted into the collector daemonset.  Currently user's must explicitly identify a deployment as 'Unmanaged' in order to make changes to the collector's configuration

Reviewer 3: seamless

Reviewer 3: `user's` -> `users`

> * Upgrades should be seemless to users of cluster logging deployments managed by the cluster-logging-operator.  The current implementation is a static file mounted into the collector daemonset.  Currently user's must explicitly identify a deployment as 'Unmanaged' in order to make changes to the collector's configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Upgrades should be seamless to users of cluster logging deployments managed by the cluster-logging-operator.  The current implementation is a static file mounted into the collector daemonset.  Currently users must explicitly identify a deployment as 'Unmanaged' in order to make changes to the collector's configuration
```

> * Downgrades should be seemless for the same reasons identified for upgrades.

Reviewer 2: even if they are using the pipelines feature at the time they downgrade?

Author: How exactly should we express this.  The default is to always ship logs to the managed ES. Admins who do nothing should see no difference even though this feature would still be in use after upgrade.  User's who use the feature and then downgrade would obviously no longer see logs arriving at their specified destination.  They would have to go and hack fluent's config manually to make logs flow again.

Reviewer 2: i think i'd just call it out exactly like that. 

what would it mean for logs getting to the managed ES after downgrade?  would keep working?  What if they had disabled forwarding to managed ES and then they downgrade?  will it start forwarding since the older logging stack won't understand the config that disabled it?

not saying we have to solve all these scenarios, but we need to at least outline expectations.

Author: I am making an update to discourage downgrade as this is generally a scenario we need to understand more broadly.  Elasticsearch could run into trouble if we try to downgrade a version because of the data migration it takes during upgrade.

## Motivation

Organizations desire to reuse their existing enterprise log solutions to store container logs.  Providing a declarative mechanism by which administrators define a log destination simplifies their operational burden.  The cluster logging stack is able to deploy a collector to each OKD node that is configured with the necessary permissions to collect the logs, add container metadata (e.g. labels) and ship them to the specified endpoint.

### Goals
The specific goals of this proposal are:

* Provide an API that identifies log sources and their desired destination
* Send logs to an Elasticsearch cluster not managed by the cluster logging infrastructure
* Send logs to a fluentd instance not managed by the cluster logging infrastructure via fluentd's secureforward protocol
* Allow deployment of log forwarding without deploying the entirety of the cluster logging infrastructure (e.g. Kibana, Elasticsearch)
* Support TLS between the collector and destination if so configured
* Re-use log forwarding to write logs to a cluster logging managed log aggregator (e.g. Elasticsearch)

> 

Reviewer 5: I expected to see “send logs to cloudwatch” as a target forward or easily accomplishable goal for a user.

Cloud users use cloudwatch.

Reviewer 3: Cloudwatch, S3, etc. other log destinations are out of scope for this initial implementation.  We should add them to the future or planning sections.

Author: @smarterclayton looks like you already have the power simply by modifying the log driver: `--log-driver awslogs` [1]

[1] https://medium.com/attest-engineering/kubernetes-logs-to-aws-cloudwatch-with-fluentd-ede8d88a1b4e

Reviewer 2: this would involve them using this feature to forward their logs from our fluentd to their fluentd, at which point they could configure their fluentd to forward anywhere they wanted, right?  or are you referring to a mechanism that would allow them to forward directly to aws from our fluentd?

Author: > this would involve them using this feature to forward their logs from our fluentd to their fluentd, at which point they could configure their fluentd to forward anywhere they wanted, right? or are you referring to a mechanism that would allow them to forward directly to aws from our fluentd?

i understand this configuration to modify the kublet logdriver to write directly to AWS cloudwatch completely bypassing use of fluentd.  Fluent currently tails logs from disk on the node.  Does this driver not suggest a direct write?  The post seems to conflate a couple ways of getting logs to cloudwatch

Reviewer 5: I expect the design to cover how to forward to cloud watch, regardless of whether we implement it in 4.3

Reviewer 3: There is a cloudwatch plugin for fluentd: https://github.com/yunomu/fluent-plugin-cloudwatch

Author: > I expect the design to cover how to forward to cloud watch, regardless of whether we implement it in 4.3

@smarterclayton if one can indeed write to cloud watch by modifying the kublet logdriver, would that not be preferred over introducing an intermediate service to do the job? I ask the question because in the cluster-logging case, its a matter of packaging the plugin and writing the code in the CLO where the the alternate case this falls on the responsibility of a different team who is configuring the node and outside the scope of this proposal

Reviewer 2: Sounds like there are 3 options for covering this:

1) tell admins to modify the kubelet logdriver (i dunno how viable this is in OCP given how we control the nodes?)
2) tell admins to use secureforwrd to forward to their own fluentd instance which has the cloudwatch plugin configured
3) some future point at which we support direct forwarding to cloudwatch from our collector (whether that collector is fluentd, promtail, or something else).

@jcantrill for now i'd suggest you just denote (2), possibly under "non-goals", as in "it is not a goal to support specific log forwarding storage targets, as admins can simply forward to their own fluentd and then configure that fluentd to forward to any number of specific logstore targets"

Author: updated verbiage to address

* A pipeline may support multiple target endpoints.
* Endpoints that require secrets which are not created by the cluster-logging-operator shall be created and managed by the administrator of the endpoint
* Secrets shall have keys of: cert,key,cacert which point to the respective certificates for which they represent

#### Security
* A pipeline may support TLS configuration by declaring a secret. Secrets must contain keys: cert, key, cacert
* Endpoints defined without a secret will use unsecure communication

#### Log Message Routing
* Undeclared source messages default to being routed to the internal logstore if you have one, vanishes to devnull otherwise
* Declared source messages are routed to the defined service

For example, If you have specified a source and target for `logs.app`, but did not specify anything for `logs.infra`, then either `logs.infra` logs will not be collected at all, or they will be discarded.

### Risks and Mitigations

## Design Details

The `cluster-logging-operator` will use the forwarding API to generate a collector configuration and mount any secrets into the collector pod.

### API Specification

> The proposed forwarding API:

Reviewer 6: As previously requested:  please split the log sources into different CRs so that we can properly secure them in a managed environment.

We need to allow dedicated-admins to (optionally) configure logs.app, while at the same time preventing dedicated-admins from ever modifying logs.infra.

This falls into our "Compliance" bucket of requirements.

Author: > As previously requested: please split the log sources into different CRs so that we can properly secure them in a managed environment.
> 
> We need to allow dedicated-admins to (optionally) configure logs.app, while at the same time preventing dedicated-admins from ever modifying logs.infra.
> 
> This falls into our "Compliance" bucket of requirements.
We explicitly identified this proposal as "Tech preview" because @sichvoge has suggested the API may need to change, partially for exactly this reason.  I'm not certain we will come to a consensus in the initial release but we do intend to resolve for GA

### Test Plan
#### Unit testing
* Log forwarding will add unit tests to provide adequate coverage for all changes
* BDD unit testing will be added to unit testing to make tests goals more explicit,  readable, and obvious
#### Integration and E2E tests
* Test no regressions after upgrade when log forwarding exists
* Tests to verify there are no regressions in functionality between pre and post logforwarding
* Tests to verify log forwarding is writing logs to an Elasticsearch instance not managed by cluster logging
* Tests to verify log forwarding is writing logs to an Elasticsearch instance managed by cluster logging
* Tests to verify log forwarding is writing logs to a Fluentd instance via secure forward that is not managed by cluster logging

### Graduation Criteria

##### Tech Preview

* Ability to store logs to the cluster managed log aggregator without defining log forwarding (e.g. status quo)
* Explicitly define and document log sources and their meanings (e.g. `logs.apps`, `logs.infra`)
* Explicitly define supported targets (e.g. `elasticsearch`, `fluentd`)
- End user documentation, relative API stability
- Sufficient test coverage

> - Gather feedback from users rather than just developers

Reviewer 6: Preferred method for feedback?

Author: > Preferred method for feedback?

@sichvoge Is there a specific mechanism to identify in this proposal?

Reviewer 7: I'd suggest to collect feedback on the cluster-logging-operator repo. Just create a new issue and we can start a discussion if necessary. WDYT?

- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift/docs]

## Summary

The purpose of log forwarding is to provide a declarative way by which adopters of cluster logging can ship
container and node logs to destinations that are not necessarily managed by the OKD cluster logging infrastructure.
Destinations are either on or off cluster endpoints such as the cluster logging provided Elasticsearch, an organization's Kafka message bus, or other log aggregation solutions (e.g. Splunk, Graylog).

## Motivation

Organizations desire to reuse their existing enterprise log solutions to store container logs.  Providing a declarative mechanism by which administrators define a log destination simplifies their operational burden.  They are able to take advantage of log collection infrastructure with minimal configuration changes. The cluster logging stack is able to deploy a collector to each OKD node that is configured with the necessary permissions to collect the logs, add container metadata (e.g. labels) and ship them to the specified endpoint.

### Goals
The specific goals of this proposal are:

> * Provide an API that identifies log sources and their desired outputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Provide an API that identifies log sources and their desired forwarding targets.
```

* Send logs to an Elasticsearch cluster not managed by the cluster logging infrastructure
* Send logs to a fluentd instance not managed by the cluster logging infrastructure via fluentd's secureforward protocol

> * Allow deployment of log forwarding without deploying the entirety of the cluster logging infrastructure (e.g. Kibana, Elasticsearch)

Reviewer 2: not seeing how the ClusteringLogging CRD enables this decision/configuration?  is this still a goal of this design?

Reviewer 7: currently, you would basically not configure a `logStore` or `visualization` afaik.

Reviewer 2: if that's already possible today, i don't know why it's described in the EP?

if we're proposing changing how it works(or enabling it because it's not possible today), then this EP needs more detail on that.

Author: @bparees should i clarify it:  its possible today but it means:
* admin makes stack unmanaged
* admin fixes up the fluent config manually

This proposal would move the 'management' of forwarding to the operator and CR without needing to modify the config though admins will need to still setup secrets and the servie

Reviewer 2: what i'm missing is how this allows me to avoid deploying kibana and elastic, as is implied by the statement `Allow deployment of log forwarding without deploying the entirety of the cluster logging infrastructure (e.g. Kibana, Elasticsearch)`

I get that this EP allows an admin to setup log forwarding w/o going "unmanaged", but it does not allow them to "disable" the other parts of the stack, from what I see.  If it does allow them to disable other parts of the stack, i need to understand how that is accomplished.  If they only way to do it involves going "unmanaged" then effectively it can't be done and we shouldn't talk about it.

We will be successful when:

* an administrator is able to deploy their own log aggregation service
* specifies this service in log forwarding configuration
* the service receives logs from a OKD cluster logging deployed collection agent  

### Non-Goals

Log forwarding intends to be opinionated about the source of log messages; it will explicitly define what constitutes "application logs" or "infrastructure logs". It will not allow configuration of additional sources without further design considerations and how those sources may impact the collecting agent. Log forwarding is not intended to provide a complex routing solution as one might achieve by using a custom collector configuration or a messaging solution (e.g. kafka).

## Proposal

Log forwarding will provide a declarative way to specify the outputs for specific types of logs using a 'pipeline'.  A 'pipeline' defines simple routing for one source to one or more outputs. The source of logs are opinionated and well defined by cluster logging. The initial source types are as follows:

* `logs.app` - Container logs generated by user applications running on the platform, excluding infrastructure container applications

> * `logs.infra` - Logs generated by both infrastructure components running on the platform and OKD nodes (e.g. journal logs).  "Infra" applications are defined as any pods which run in namespaces: `openshift*`, `kube*`, `default`.

Reviewer 2: this does not include the audit log right?  so "logs.audit" is also a future source (i believe that's distinct from container engine audit events)

Reviewer 3: Right.  I don't know if/where we should talk about the possibility of future pipeline sources.

#### As an OKD admin, I want to aggregate application logs on-cluster and infra logs off-cluster

This is an example of an OKD cluster hosting solution where several organizations are each provided with a dedicated cluster.  The organization requires access to application container logs but the host requires access to the infra structure logs.

### Implementation Details

#### Assumptions

* A pipeline shall support at least one output. 
* A pipeline may support multiple outputs.
* Outputs that require secrets which are not created by the cluster-logging-operator shall be created and managed by the administrator of the endpoint
* Secrets shall have keys of: `tls.crt`, `tls.key`, `ca-bundler.crt` which point to the respective certificates for which they represent. Secrets shall have the key `shared_key` for use when using secureforward 

#### Security
* A pipeline may support TLS configuration by declaring a secret. Secrets must contain keys: `tls.crt`, `tls.key`, `ca-bundler.crt`
* Endpoints defined without a secret will use unsecure communication and must explicitly declare `insecure: true` in the output specifification

#### Log Message Routing

> The `cluster-logging-operator` will create a `spec.forward` section routing both `logs.infra` and `logs.app` logs to the internal logstore if the logstore is defined in the `clusterlogging` resource and `spec.forward` is not

Reviewer 2: when will it create this?  only during install/bootstrapping i'd expect.  after that i would not expect you to stomp the user's configuration, and i would expect you to just go ahead and define spec.forward.

Author: Added content to the upgrade section.  cc @derekwaynecarr  for awareness

> * Undeclared source messages will be dropped if they are undefined int `spec.forward`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Undeclared source messages will be dropped if they are undefined in `spec.forward`
```

- More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- Concrete API
- Additional supported outputs (e.g. `Splunk`, `Graylog`, `kafka`)
- Support for SRE usecase: As an administrator of a dedicated cluster, I need to allow dedicated-admins to configure the destination of container logs (logs.apps) separately from infra logs so they are prevented from modifying where infra logs (logs.infra) are forwarded
- Modify API to support: include and exclude of logs

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

#### Upgrade
Upgrades should be seamless to users of cluster logging deployments managed by the `cluster-logging-operator`.  The current implementation is a static file mounted into the collector daemonset.  Currently users must
explicitly identify a deployment as 'Unmanaged' in order to make changes to the collector's configuration. Admins who make no changes will see no difference after upgrade when this feature is deployed.
Upon upgrade, the `cluster-logging-operator` will create a `spec.forwarding` section routing both `logs.infra` and `logs.app` logs to the internal logstore if the logstore is defined in the `clusterlogging` resource and

> `spec.forwarding` is not.  The `cluster-logging-operator` will set a status field to indicate it performed the upgrade and will take no further action duing subsequent migrations or `cluster-loging-operator` restarts.

Reviewer 2: fyi This migration path was chosen due to OLM not supporting conversion webhooks today.
